Consolidation Providers and Hooks (#3356)
mongodb/docs-realm: source/frameworks/react/providers-hooks.txt

.. _sdks-react-providers-hooks:

=================
Providers & Hooks
=================

.. meta:: 
   :description: Develop apps using the providers and Hooks available in the @realm/react library.
   :keywords: Realm, Javascript SDK, React, code example

.. facet::
  :name: genre
  :values: reference

.. facet::
   :name: programming_language
   :values: javascript/typescript

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 3
   :class: singlecol

The ``@realm/react`` library offers custom React components that eliminate the boilerplate needed to
develop a React app using JavaScript-based Atlas Device SDKs. The components leverage the
provider design pattern to manage your Atlas connection, user creation and authentication, and
data management.

> - :realm-react-sdk:`AppProvider (@realm/react) <functions/AppProvider.html>`

Reviewer: On the prior version of this page, we had a short description of what each provider was used for. That was helpful for folks who don't know our functionality well and don't necessarily understand from the provider name what something like "App" and "Realm" might be referring to. (App in particular is a really generic term, and I wouldn't automatically assume that an AppProvider was used to manage a connection to Atlas.)

I'm curious why we removed the descriptions here.

Also, as a note, we probably _don't_ want to add a lot of links at the top of the page that take the users _off_ the page without making it clear that's what we're doing. In coming to this page, I would have assumed these links take me to somewhere on the page where I can learn more about the specific provider, since there is no description provided here. I would suggest we handle this in one of a few ways:

- Instead of linking off the page, link to somewhere on the page where we describe what each provider is for and how you use it. You could link out to the API reference from there for people who want more info.
- Keep the links as-is, and add "API Reference" to the link text to make it clearer you're going off to a different page - i.e. `AppProvider API Reference (@realm/react) <link>`
- Remove the links entirely, and just add a short description of what each provider is for. Let users go to the relevant section - props or hooks - and get linked out to the API reference from there where it is contextually relevant.

- :realm-react-sdk:`UserProvider (@realm/react) <functions/UserProvider.html>`

- :realm-react-sdk:`RealmProvider (@realm/react) <functions/RealmProvider.html>`

The providers are available in all SDKs that support a React environment. This includes React
Native, Web, and Electron.

Getting Started with Providers
------------------------------

Like all React components, you call providers using HTML opening and closing tags. Nesting a
component within another component's tags creates a parent-child relationship between them,
where child components can access the context created by their parent component. 

Context refers to the information made accessible by a provider. For example, the

> ``RealmProvider`` context is the database it connects to, so all components nested in the

Reviewer 2: "Realm instance" or "Realm database" would be more descriptive.

``RealmProvider`` have access to that database.

Props
~~~~~

Components take parameters called props as input, passed into the opening tag. The props passed
into a parent component help create the context inherited by the components it wraps. Each
Provider has different props you can use for configuration.

.. tabs::

   .. tab:: RealmProvider Props
      :tabid: realm-provider-props

      All properties of :realm-react-sdk:`BaseConfiguration <types/Realm.BaseConfiguration.html>` can be passed as props.

      The most common BaseConfiguration properties used are:

      - ``schema?: (RealmObjectConstructor<AnyRealmObject> | ObjectSchema)[]``

        Specifies all the object schemas in the database. Required when first creating a database.
        If omitted, the schema will be read from the existing database file.

>       - ``sync?: SyncConfiguration``

Reviewer: SyncConfiguration is a pretty complex object, and since we _want_ people to use Sync as a default, we might consider linking out to it here.

        Defines Device Sync behavior for this database, including initial subscriptions.

      ``RealmProvider`` has more props that define its behavior:

      - ``fallback?: React.ComponentType<unknown> | React.ReactElement | null | undefined``

        The fallback component to render while the database is opening or if it fails to open.

      - ``closeOnUnmount?: boolean``

>         Default is ``true``. If set to ``false``, the open datahase will not close when the

Reviewer 3: Do we want to mention the scenarios where `false` is a good value?

        component unmounts.

      - ``realmRef?: React.MutableRefObject<Realm | null>``

        A ref to the database instance. This is useful if you need to access the database
        instance outside of the scope of the database.
      

>       - ``children: React.ReactNode``

Reviewer 2: would you like to also describe the possibility to pass `realm` `app` as props? 
This is currently undocumented as it is new but people have usecases for this:
https://github.com/realm/realm-js/issues/6283
https://github.com/realm/realm-js/issues/6785

It may complicate the docs, so kind of up to where you'd want this information to be.

   .. tab:: AppProvider Props
      :tabid: app-provider-props

      All properties of :realm-react-sdk:`AppConfiguration 
      <types/Realm.AppConfiguration.html>` can be passed as props to ``AppProvider``.

      The most common AppConfiguration property used is:

      - ``id: string``

        Specifies the App Services App ID.

   .. tab:: UserProvider Props
      :tabid: user-provider-props

      The only prop passed into ``UserProvider`` is an optional fallback component:

      - ``fallback?: React.ComponentType<unknown> | React.ReactElement | null | undefined``

        The fallback component to render if there is no authorized user. This can be
        used to render a log in screen or otherwise handle authentication.

Configure your Providers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Your app's needs determine what providers you use, as all three providers are not always

Reviewer: This seems like good information to also include at the top of the page, where we list the three providers.

necessary:

- ``AppProvider``: Used to connect to your :ref:`Atlas App Services App Client
  <create-app>`, including for user authentication.

- ``UserProvider``: Used to access the logged-in :ref:`user object <user-accounts>`.

- ``RealmProvider``: Used to work with the configured database.

The example below walks through configuring all three providers. If your app does not need a
certain provider, you can skip the steps and omit the code for that provider.

> .. note:: Exposing more than one database using createRealmContext()

Reviewer: I would probably move this note to _below_ the example. We're already asking the reader to go through a lot of text before they get to see example code. This seems like information that is secondary to showing the example - i.e. conceptually - now you've seen how to do this in general, if you need to use more than one database, go to this other part of the page.

   The example details how to configure and expose a single database using a ``RealmProvider``
   imported directly from ``@realm/react``. 
   For information about using ``createRealmContext()`` to configure a database or exposing more
   than one database, see :ref:`Create Context with createRealmContext()
   <create_context_with_createrealmcontext>` below.

**To configure your providers:**

1. Import ``RealmProvider``, ``AppProvider``, and ``UserProvider`` from ``@realm/react``.

2. Configure ``AppProvider``.

   a. Pass your App Services App ID string to the ``id`` prop of the ``AppProvider``.

   b. Add other configuration object properties as props to ``AppProvider`` as needed.

3. Configure ``UserProvider`` and nest it within ``AppProvider``.
   
   a. Pass a component that logs in a user to the ``fallback`` prop. The app renders this component if there is no authenticated user.

4. Configure ``RealmProvider`` and nest it within ``UserProvider``.

   a. Pass your object models to the ``schema`` prop.

   b. If configuring a synced database, pass your sync properties into the ``sync`` prop. Your

>       sync properties are formatted like a JSON dictionary.

Reviewer 2: sync properties are defined by an object of type `SyncConfiguration`; if you can't link it to the type, I'd describe it something like "sync properties are defined by an object with different configuration fields".

JSON was inspired by the object structure in JavaScript so calling an object formatted like JSON sounds a bit weird to me.

   
      To sync data, you must set up a sync subscription. The example below uses an initial subscription,
      but you can also set up subscriptions in ``RealmProvider`` child components.

   c. Add other configuration object properties as props to ``RealmProvider`` as needed.

> 5. Nest you app components in the providers.
>    Once your providers have been configured, nest your app components within the

Reviewer: If you want this to be a description under the number heading, instead of just a part of the number heading (which I think would be easier to read and it looks like that's what you're going for!) then you'll need to add an empty line here.

Also, small typo - "Nest you" should be "Nest your".
```suggestion
5. Nest your app components in the providers.

   Once your providers have been configured, nest your app components within the
```

   provider whose context it needs to access. Generally, you can nest your components within the

>    ``RealmProvider`` to ensure they have access to all three providers' contexts.

Reviewer 2: but you may also need to make sure this RealmProvider is also nested under User/App for sync right? might be worth mentioning

The rendering of each component is dependent on the successful

> execution of its parent components' functionality. For example, if ``AppProvider`` cannot

Reviewer 2: RealmProvider has a fallback component which gets rendered instead which may be worth mentioning here.

Not released yet but we're also working on adding progress information to this fallback: https://github.com/realm/realm-js/pull/6801

connect to your app's App Services backend, the components it wraps will not render.

You *must* nest the providers as shown below to ensure each has access to its required context:

.. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/react-native/ts/configure-realm-sync.test.snippet.configure-realm-sync-full.tsx
   :language: javascript

Working with Providers using Hooks
----------------------------------

To use the provider's context in your app's components, you can use Hooks.

Hooks act as functions used to access states in your app. React offers built-in Hooks you can
use either on their own or to build custom  Hooks.

There are two important rules to consider when working with Hooks:

- Hooks can only be used at the top level of a React component.
- Hooks can only be called in a React component or a custom Hook, not in regular JavaScript
  functions.

The ``@realm/react`` library has custom Hooks for each provider you can
use to access a provider's context in the components it wraps.

RealmProvider Hooks
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _sdks-react-use-realm-hook:

useRealm()
``````````

.. code:: typescript
   :copyable: false
   :caption: Type signature

   useRealm(): Realm 

> The ``useRealm()`` Hook returns an opened :js-sdk:`database instance<classes/Realm-1.html>`. The database instance

Reviewer 3: Neat that you write "Hook" and not "hook" as in the official React documentation 👍🏻

.. _sdks-react-use-auth-hook:

useAuth()
`````````

.. code:: typescript
   :copyable: false
   :caption: Type signature

   useAuth(): UseAuth

You destructure the ``useAuth()`` Hook result into a ``result`` and authentication method.

result
++++++

.. code:: typescript
   :copyable: false
   :caption: Type signature

   result: AuthResult

Result of authentication Hook operation. For example, ``result.operation`` gives
you the name of the current operation.

*Enum values* 

- ``state``: Can be ``"not-started"``, ``"pending"``, ``"success"``, ``"error"``.
- ``operation``: For a list of all operation names, refer to the
  :realm-react-sdk:`API documentation <enums/AuthOperationName.html>`.
- ``pending``: Can be ``true`` or ``false``.
- ``success``: Can be ``true`` or ``false``.
- ``error``: Error-based object or undefined.

Authentication Methods
++++++++++++++++++++++

The authentication method specifies how you want users to login to your app. ``useAuth`` has an authentication method for every App Services authentication provider.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 1
   :widths: 15 20 65

   * - Operation
     - Parameter
     - Example

   * - logIn

>      - ``credentials``: An Atlas credential supplied by any supported Atlas authentication.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     - ``credentials``: An Atlas credential supplied by any supported Atlas App Services authentication provider.
```

>      - Logs in a user with any authentication mechanism supported by Atlas. If called when a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     - Logs in a user with any authentication mechanism supported by Atlas App Services. If called when a
```

       user is logged in, the current user switches to the new user. Usually, it's better to use
       the more specific login methods.

       .. code:: typescript

         const {logIn, result} = useAuth();

         useEffect(() => logIn(Realm.Credentials.anonymous()), []);

         if(result.pending) {
            return (<LoadingSpinner/>)
         }

         if(result.error) {
            return (<ErrorComponent/>)
         }

         if(result.success) {
            return (<SuccessComponent/>)
         }
         //...

   * - logInWithAnonymous
     - None
     - Log in with the anonymous authentication provider.

       .. code:: typescript

         const {logInWithAnonymous, result} = useAuth();
         const performLogin = () => {
            logInWithAnonymous();
         };

>    * - logInWithApiKey

Reviewer: I'm generally ok with the wrapping, but this method where we're wrapping one character just looks really odd to me. I notice a few places below we're wrapping 1, 2, or 3 characters. 

I notice some of the code blocks in the table require scrolling even at the current table width. It seems like the `// user defined function` text is what's requiring most of the code blocks to scroll. I wonder if we can remove that comment - maybe move the comment to the line above or below, or mention above the table that the `getAPIKey` or `getToken` functions are user-defined. IF we can remove this `user-defined function` text, I think we can make the third column a little narrower and give this first column a little more space so we're not wrapping single characters.

     - ``key``: A string that is linked to an App Services user.
     - Log in with an API key.

       .. code:: typescript

         const {logInWithApiKey, result} = useAuth();
         const performLogin = () => {

>          const key = getApiKey(); // user defined function

Reviewer: This is just a Q - I don't know React so I don't know the indentation conventions here. But since we're inside a closure, should the const in this stanza be indented? i.e.:

```typescript
const performLogin = () => {
     const key = getApiKey(); // user defined function
     logInWithApiKey(key);
};
```

(Same question applies in each example below where we're defining a `const` in closures to get the relevant tokens.)

         const {resetPassword, result} = useEmailPasswordAuth();
         const [password, setPassword] = useState('');

         const performResetPassword = () => {
            resetPassword({token, tokenId, password});
         };

   * - callResetPasswordFunction
     - ``args``: An object that contains ``email`` and ``password`` properties.

       ``restArgs``: Additional arguments that you need to pass to your custom
       reset password function.
     - Calls your App Services backend password reset function. Can pass arguments to
       the function as needed.

       .. code:: typescript

         const {callResetPasswordFunction, result} = useEmailPasswordAuth();
         const [email, setEmail] = useState('');
         const [password, setPassword] = useState('');

         const performResetPassword = () => {
            callResetPasswordFunction({email, password}, "extraArg1", "extraArg2");
         };

.. _create_context_with_createrealmcontext:

Create Context with createRealmContext()
----------------------------------------

.. code:: typescript
   :copyable: false
   :caption: Type signature

   createRealmContext(realmConfig?): RealmContext

> Most of the time, you will only use ``createRealmContext()`` if you need to

Reviewer: Our style guide calls for us to avoid future tense, so I'd say we should remove the "will" here. But we can also trim this to be much more concise:
```suggestion
Use ``createRealmContext()`` to
```

> configure more than one database. Otherwise, you should import ``RealmProvider``

Reviewer: We can simplify here by removing the "you should."
```suggestion
configure more than one database. Otherwise, import ``RealmProvider``
```

and its associated Hooks directly from ``@realm/react``.

The ``createRealmContext()`` method creates a `React Context
<https://react.dev/learn/passing-data-deeply-with-context>`__ object for a database with a given
:realm-react-sdk:`Configuration <types/Realm.BaseConfiguration.html>`. The
``Context`` object contains the following: 

- A Context Provider component that wraps around child components
  and provides them with access to Hooks.
- Various prebuilt Hooks that access the configured database.

To work with more than one database, you need to destructure a new provider and its
associated Hooks from the result of ``createRealmContext()``. You can call this new database
provider and use its associated Hooks the same way you would with the ``RealmProvider``

> imported from the ``@realm/react`` library. You should namespace providers

Reviewer: The use of "you should" weakens the writing. Just make the recommendation - it's more authoritative.
```suggestion
imported from the ``@realm/react`` library. Namespace your providers
```
